---
title: "Demonstrating a Production Application Platform with the Reference Platform for Kubernetes Project"
date: "2021-06-02"
description: ""
categories:
  - "Kubernetes"
tags:
  - "Kubernetes"
menu: side # Optional, add page to a menu. Options: main, side, footer
# Theme-Defined params
#thumbnail: "img/placeholder.jpg" # Thumbnail image
#lead: "Example lead - highlighted near the title" # Lead text
comments: true # Enable Disqus comments for specific page
authorbox: true # Enable authorbox for specific page
toc: true # Enable Table of Contents for specific page
mathjax: true # Enable MathJax for specific page
---

## Introduction

Recently, I was able to get involved with an internal project while working at VMware that allowed a group of field engineers
to help to enable the broader Kubernetes community by developing a method to allow
consumers of said project to demonstrate what a production viable application platform may look
like.  Specifically, those who have been working with Kubernetes for a while understand the potholes
and the decisions that go into producing a production viable platform.  However, Kubernetes has
been emerging and gaining steam recently, and new users are often faced with the questions like:

1. What would this look like in Production?
2. What makes up a Production viable platform?
3. There are so many projects out there that could make up an application platform, which ones should I use?

This blog is set to outline the findings of that project and demonstrate how users can quickly get hands
on with a platform which demonstrates what a production platform might look like.

The project was initially referred to as "Project Ivy", but is now avaiable on GitHub via
the name "Reference Platform for Kubernetes" or RPK (https://github.com/vmware-tanzu-labs/reference-platform-for-kubernetes).

## Beginning the Project

### Getting Started

There are so many different projects within the CNCF landscape, how could we possibly settle on
what our platform looked like to achieve the highest resonance with our consumers?  At the time,
we had an internal initiative to document field best practices and opinions.  That internal initiative
outlined each "building block" within a production-style platform in an extremely well-organized manner.  The decision we
made was to align our platform with the opinions and projects of our internal initiative.  That initiative is now
openly available via the Tanzu Developer Center at https://tanzu.vmware.com/developer/guides/kubernetes/.

In addition, we had to take into account that `helm install <package>` would not be a viable methodology, as
helm does not have a good mechanism to resolve and deploy dependencies and to orchestrate the integration between its
charts/packages.  Helm is a fantastic tool for quickly installing individual components, however it
relies on user input to a values file which makes it difficult to orchestrate the integration between
components.

Another area of focus for RPK was layering components on top of a pre-existing Kubernetes installation.
An anti-goal of the project was coming up with another way of installing Kubernetes, rather
to focus on the ability to extend a day zero Kubernetes platform.

Finally, we had to understand that not all two platforms will look the same, so users would need a way
to easily install individual components as well as customize which components would be installed when
deploying their sample platform.

#### Lessons Learned

1. Align opinions with documented best practices (https://tanzu.vmware.com/developer/guides/kubernetes/)
2. Pick most commonly used components to fit the 80% use case
3. Strong opinions on what each component contained to avoid increased scope
4. Orchestrate integration between components is key
5. Resolve dependencies between components is key
6. Focus on layering components on post-installation

### Tooling

#### Orchestration (Ansible)

Very quickly, we learned that we were a talented group of people with vastly different backgrounds.  As such,
selecting the tooling would be a challenge.  Furthermore, the tooling should be easy enough for us to use
and/or learn quickly, as well as produce the outcome of demonstrating a sample production-viable application
platform atop Kubernetes.

We landed as Ansible as our tooling of choice to give us the best balance of:

1. Robust orchestration language
2. Tool which matches the background of the individuals involved
3. Tool which quickly allows for a path to success (internal project do not last forever!)
4. Tool which would allow us to meet above requirements

#### Deployment (Ansible)

In addition to orchestration, Ansible offers a `k8s` suite of modules to deploy manifests to clusters and to do
things like wait for said resources in manifests to be completely deployed before continuing.  Although tools like
Carvel's [kapp](https://carvel.dev/kapp/) does solve for this use case, we wanted to avoid tool overload
and focus on making the automation obvious as to what was happening, rather than introduce extra complexities
where it may be unneeded.

#### Starting Point (Manifests)

This was the real challenge.  We wanted to ensure that we didn't reinvent the wheel, so we had to scrounge the
internet for helm charts and internal manifests which met our needs, and adjust them to our liking.  At the
time we started, we accepted that we would be managing those manifests for the life of the project.  However, there are
other tools out now like Carvel's [vendir](https://carvel.dev/vendir/) which would have allowed us to declaratively
specify the state of our manifests directory, given an upstream source.

#### CLI (Make/Bash/Docker)

We wanted to keep this incredibly simple.  As such, we chose to use simple make targets that would run a docker
command to instantiate a versioned image which would use a bash script as an entrypoint to initiate our Ansible
playbook.  This seemed like the simplest way short of writing our own custom CLI using something like Cobra for
GoLang.

#### Distribution and Developer Experience (Docker)

We had the additional challenge of noting that Ansible, by way of Python, has an inconsistent way of managing
library dependencies (e.g. MacOS doesn't play the same as RHEL, etc), even in sitatuions where Python virtual environments
are used.  Additionally, how do we control which version of Ansible is used and supported by the project?

This made the choice easy, which allowed us to double down on the decision to use Docker as an entrypoint for
execution of RPK, as we could simply create a Dockerfile for our project and package our dependencies and entrypoint script
together in a convenient image.  An added benefit is that users only need 2 tools to be installed to use RPK:

1. Bash w/ Make (commonly distributed in most *nix distributions by default)
2. Docker

### Using the Tool

#### Install the Default Platform

As stated initially, the "Default Platform" needed to be quick and easy to deploy and offer a quick path to allowing users
to see what a sample platfrom might look like.  The steps to do so are relatively simple:

1. Clone the repository and navigate to the directory:

```bash
git clone git@github.com:vmware-tanzu-labs/reference-platform-for-kubernetes.git
cd reference-platform-for-kubernetes
```

2. Instantiate the Ansible inventory, which is also used as a global variable store:

```bash
make setup.<aws|vmware|azure|kind>
```

3. Review the sensible defaults in the inventory, being sure to input the kubectl config context in which
you wish to use and reviewing which profile is being deployed (default: platform):

```bash
vim build/inventory.yaml

...
tanzu_kubectl_context: "my-kubeconfig-kubectl-context"
rpk_profile:           "platform"
...
```

4. Review the components being installed by the profile:

```bash
vim profiles/platform.yaml
```

5. Deploy RPK!!!:

```bash
make deploy
```

#### Install a Single Component

Considering steps 1-3 above from [above](#install-the-default-platform), deploy the component AND its dependencies in which you wish to install to
your platform:

1. List the components:

```bash
make list.components.all
```

2. Review the dependencies which get installed with the component:

```bash
vim roles/components/<core|extensions>/<component_name>/.dependencies.yaml
```

3. Deploy the component:

```bash
ROLE=<component_name> make deploy.role
```

#### Install a Custom Profile

Considering steps 1-3 above from [above](#install-the-default-platform), create a custom profile with the components in which you wish to install:

1. List the components:

```bash
make list.components.all
```

2. Add components to your profile:

```bash
vim profiles/components.yaml

...
  - name:    "workload-tenancy"
    enabled: true
    profiles:
      - "platform"
      - "my-custom-profile
...
```

3. Build your profile:

```bash
make build.profiles
```

4. Add the profile to your inventory:

```bash
vim build/inventory.yaml

...
rpk_profile: "my-custom-profile"
...
```

5. Deploy your profile:

```bash
make deploy
```

### Summary

Thanks for reading!  Feel free to contribute to [RPK](https://github.com/vmware-tanzu-labs/reference-platform-for-kubernetes) after reviewing our [contributing guide](https://github.com/vmware-tanzu-labs/reference-platform-for-kubernetes/blob/develop/docs/CONTRIBUTING.md)!
